README.md, before:

# `robust_hermite_ft`

[![python-3.9](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-390/)
[![python-3.10](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3100/)
[![python-3.11](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3110/)
[![python-3.12](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3120/)
[![code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![code style: isort](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-isort-000000.svg)](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/)
[![Checked with mypy](http://www.mypy-lang.org/static/mypy_badge.svg)](http://mypy-lang.org/)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/MothNik/robust_hermite_ft/branch/10-improve-and-add-coverage-to-CI/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/MothNik/robust_hermite_ft/branch/10-improve-and-add-coverage-to-CI)
![tests](https://github.com/MothNik/robust_hermite_ft/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg)
<br><br>

You want to compute the Fourier transform of a signal, but your signal can be corrupted by outliers? If so, this package is for you even though you will have to say goodbye to the _"fast"_ in _Fast Fourier Transform_ 🏃🙅‍♀️

🏗️🚧 👷👷‍♂️👷‍♀️🏗️🚧

Currently under construction. Please check back later.

## ⚙️ Setup and 🪛 Development

### 🎁 Installation

Currently, the package is not yet available on PyPI. To install it, you can clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MothNik/robust_hermite_ft.git
```

For the following commands, a Makefile is provided to simplify the process. Its use is
optional, but recommended.<br>
From within the repositories root directory, the package can be installed for normal use

```bash
# activate your virtual environment, e.g., source venv/bin/activate
make install
# equivalent to
pip install --upgrade .
```

or for development (with all the development dependencies)

```bash
# activate your virtual environment, e.g., source venv/bin/activate
make install-dev
# equivalent to
pip install --upgrade .["dev"]
```

⚠️ **Warning**: This will require a C-compiler to be installed on your system to
compile the Cython code.

When working in developer mode, an environment variable has to be added to run certain
scripts.

```
ROBHERMFT_DEVELOPER = true
```

### 🔎 Code quality

The following checks for `black`, `isort`, `pyright`, `mypy`, `pycodestyle`, `ruff`, and
`cython-lint` - that are also part of the CI pipeline - can be run with

```bash
make black-check
make isort-check
make pyright-check
make mypy-check
make pycodestyle-check
make ruff-check
make cython-check

# or for all at once
make check

# equivalent to
black --check --diff --color ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
isort --check --diff --color ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
pyright ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
mypy ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
ruff check ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
pycodestyle ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests --max-line-length=88 --ignore=E203,W503
cython-lint src/robust_hermite_ft/hermite_functions/_c_hermite.pyx
```

### ✅❌ Tests

To run the tests - almost like in the CI pipeline - you can use

```bash
make test-xmlcov  # for an XML report
make test-htmlcov  # for an HTML report

# equivalent to
pytest --cov=robust_hermite_ft ./tests -n="auto" --cov-report=xml -x --no-jit
pytest --cov=robust_hermite_ft ./tests -n="auto" --cov-report=html -x --no-jit
```

for parallelized testing whose coverage report will be stored in the file
`./coverage.xml` or in the folder `./htmlcov`, respectively.

## 〰️ Hermite functions

Being the eigenfunctions of the Fourier transform, Hermite functions are excellent
candidates for the basis functions for a Least Squares Regression approach to the Fourier
transform. However, their evaluation can be a bit tricky.

The module `hermite_functions` offers a numerically stable way to evaluate Hermite
functions or arbitrary order $n$ and argument - that can be scaled with a factor
$\alpha$ and shifted by a constant $\mu$:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-01-DilatedHermiteFunctions_DifferentScales.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

After a slight modification of the definitions in [[1]](#references), the Hermite
functions can be written as

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-01-Hermite_Functions_TimeSpace_Domain.svg" />
</p>

with the Hermite polynomials

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-02-Hermite_Polynomials_TimeSpace_Domain.svg" />
</p>

By making use of logarithm tricks, the evaluation that might involve infinitely high
polynomial values and at the same time infinitely small Gaussians - that are on top of
that scaled by an infinitely high factorial - can be computed safely and yield accurate
results.

For doing so, the relation between the dilated and the non-dilated Hermite functions

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-03-Hermite_Functions_Dilated_to_Undilated.svg" />
</p>

and the recurrence relation for the Hermite functions

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-04-Hermite_Functions_Recurrence_Relation.svg" />
</p>

are used, but not directly. Instead, the latest evaluated Hermite function is kept at a
value of either -1, 0, or +1 during the recursion and the logarithm of a correction
factor is tracked and applied when the respective Hermite function is finally evaluated
and stored. This approach is based on [[2]](#references).

The implementation is tested against a symbolic evaluation with `sympy` that uses 200
digits of precision and it can be shown that even orders as high as 2,000 can still be
computed even though neither the polynomial, the Gaussian nor the factorial can be
evaluated for this anymore. The factorial for example would already have overflown for
orders of 170 in `float64`-precision.

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-02-DilatedHermiteFunctions_Stability.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

As a sanity check, their orthogonality is part of the tests together with a test for
the fact that the absolute values of the Hermite functions for real input cannot exceed
the value $\frac{1}{\sqrt[4]{\pi\cdot\alpha^{2}}}$.

On top of that `robust_hermite_ft` comes with utility functions to approximate some
special points of the Hermite functions, namely the x-positions of their

- largest root (= outermost zero),
- largest extrema in the outermost oscillation, and
- the point where they numerically fade to zero.

```python
from robust_hermite_ft import (
    approximate_hermite_funcs_fadeout_x,
    approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_extrema_x,
    approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_zeros_x,
)

# 1) the x-positions at which the outermost oscillation fades below machine
# precision
x_fadeout = approximate_hermite_funcs_fadeout_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
# 2) the x-positions of the largest zeros
x_largest_zero = approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_zeros_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
# 3) the x-positions of the largest extrema
x_largest_extremum = approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_extrema_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-04-HermiteFunctions_SpecialPoints.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

## 📖 References

- [1] Dobróka M., Szegedi H., and Vass P., Inversion-Based Fourier Transform as a New
  Tool for Noise Rejection, _Fourier Transforms - High-tech Application and Current Trends_
  (2017), DOI: [http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/66338](http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/66338)
- [2] Bunck B. F., A fast algorithm for evaluation of normalized Hermite functions,
  _BIT Numer Math_ (2009), 49, pp. 281–295, DOI:
  [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10543-009-0216-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10543-009-0216-1)

Commit message:

[21, 22] Remaned package to `robust_fourier`; dropped Cython implementation of Hermite functions (#23)
* Issue #22
MAINT:
- dropped Cython implementation of Hermite functions (also `cython-lint` as a check in the CI)

* Issue #22
MAINT:
- removed `Cython` and `psutil` from the requirements

* Issue #22
MAINT:
- completely dropped Cython implementation of all Hermite functions in the whole package

Issue #23
MAINT:
- renamed package from `robust_hermite_ft` to `robust_fourier`

* BUG:
- raised coverage to 100% again by conducting type error check for the `jit` property of the Hermite function class interface

* BUG:
- fix `black` check crashing the CI because of missing empty line

* Issue #22
MAINT:
- relaxed upper bound on NumPy version (now also v2 will be allowed)

* BUG:
- fixed wrong hashtag in test file

* BUG:
- fixed NumPy v2 deprecated `trapz`

README.md, after:

# `robust_fourier`

[![python-3.9](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.9-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-390/)
[![python-3.10](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3100/)
[![python-3.11](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3110/)
[![python-3.12](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.12-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3120/)
[![code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![code style: isort](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-isort-000000.svg)](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/)
[![Checked with mypy](http://www.mypy-lang.org/static/mypy_badge.svg)](http://mypy-lang.org/)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/MothNik/robust_fourier/branch/10-improve-and-add-coverage-to-CI/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/MothNik/robust_fourier/branch/10-improve-and-add-coverage-to-CI)
![tests](https://github.com/MothNik/robust_fourier/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg)
<br><br>

You want to compute the Fourier transform of a signal, but your signal can be corrupted by outliers? If so, this package is for you even though you will have to say goodbye to the _"fast"_ in _Fast Fourier Transform_ 🏃🙅‍♀️

🏗️🚧 👷👷‍♂️👷‍♀️🏗️🚧

Currently under construction. Please check back later.

## ⚙️ Setup and 🪛 Development

### 🎁 Installation

Currently, the package is not yet available on PyPI. To install it, you can clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/MothNik/robust_fourier.git
```

For the following commands, a Makefile is provided to simplify the process. Its use is
optional, but recommended.<br>
From within the repositories root directory, the package can be installed for normal use

```bash
# activate your virtual environment, e.g., source venv/bin/activate
make install
# equivalent to
pip install --upgrade .
```

or for development (with all the development dependencies)

```bash
# activate your virtual environment, e.g., source venv/bin/activate
make install-dev
# equivalent to
pip install --upgrade .["dev"]
```

When working in developer mode, an environment variable has to be added to run certain
scripts.

```
ROBFT_DEVELOPER = true
```

### 🔎 Code quality

The following checks for `black`, `isort`, `pyright`, `mypy`, `pycodestyle`, and
`ruff` - that are also part of the CI pipeline - can be run with

```bash
make black-check
make isort-check
make pyright-check
make mypy-check
make pycodestyle-check
make ruff-check

# or for all at once
make check

# equivalent to
black --check --diff --color ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
isort --check --diff --color ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
pyright ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
mypy ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
ruff check ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests
pycodestyle ./auxiliary_scripts ./examples ./src ./tests --max-line-length=88 --ignore=E203,W503
```

### ✅❌ Tests

To run the tests - almost like in the CI pipeline - you can use

```bash
make test-xmlcov  # for an XML report
make test-htmlcov  # for an HTML report

# equivalent to
pytest --cov=robust_fourier ./tests -n="auto" --cov-report=xml -x --no-jit
pytest --cov=robust_fourier ./tests -n="auto" --cov-report=html -x --no-jit
```

for parallelized testing whose coverage report will be stored in the file
`./coverage.xml` or in the folder `./htmlcov`, respectively.

## 〰️ Hermite functions

Being the eigenfunctions of the Fourier transform, Hermite functions are excellent
candidates for the basis functions for a Least Squares Regression approach to the Fourier
transform. However, their evaluation can be a bit tricky.

The module `hermite_functions` offers a numerically stable way to evaluate Hermite
functions or arbitrary order $n$ and argument - that can be scaled with a factor
$\alpha$ and shifted by a constant $\mu$:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-01-DilatedHermiteFunctions_DifferentScales.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

After a slight modification of the definitions in [[1]](#references), the Hermite
functions can be written as

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-01-Hermite_Functions_TimeSpace_Domain.svg" />
</p>

with the Hermite polynomials

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-02-Hermite_Polynomials_TimeSpace_Domain.svg" />
</p>

By making use of logarithm tricks, the evaluation that might involve infinitely high
polynomial values and at the same time infinitely small Gaussians - that are on top of
that scaled by an infinitely high factorial - can be computed safely and yield accurate
results.

For doing so, the relation between the dilated and the non-dilated Hermite functions

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-03-Hermite_Functions_Dilated_to_Undilated.svg" />
</p>

and the recurrence relation for the Hermite functions

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/equations/HF-04-Hermite_Functions_Recurrence_Relation.svg" />
</p>

are used, but not directly. Instead, the latest evaluated Hermite function is kept at a
value of either -1, 0, or +1 during the recursion and the logarithm of a correction
factor is tracked and applied when the respective Hermite function is finally evaluated
and stored. This approach is based on [[2]](#references).

The implementation is tested against a symbolic evaluation with `sympy` that uses 200
digits of precision and it can be shown that even orders as high as 2,000 can still be
computed even though neither the polynomial, the Gaussian nor the factorial can be
evaluated for this anymore. The factorial for example would already have overflown for
orders of 170 in `float64`-precision.

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-02-DilatedHermiteFunctions_Stability.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

As a sanity check, their orthogonality is part of the tests together with a test for
the fact that the absolute values of the Hermite functions for real input cannot exceed
the value $\frac{1}{\sqrt[4]{\pi\cdot\alpha^{2}}}$.

On top of that `robust_fourier` comes with utility functions to approximate some
special points of the Hermite functions, namely the x-positions of their

- largest root (= outermost zero),
- largest extrema in the outermost oscillation, and
- the point where they numerically fade to zero.

```python
from robust_fourier import (
    approximate_hermite_funcs_fadeout_x,
    approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_extrema_x,
    approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_zeros_x,
)

# 1) the x-positions at which the outermost oscillation fades below machine
# precision
x_fadeout = approximate_hermite_funcs_fadeout_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
# 2) the x-positions of the largest zeros
x_largest_zero = approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_zeros_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
# 3) the x-positions of the largest extrema
x_largest_extremum = approximate_hermite_funcs_largest_extrema_x(
    n=25,
    alpha=20.0,
    x_center=150.0,
)
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/hermite_functions/EX-04-HermiteFunctions_SpecialPoints.svg" width="1000px" />
</p>

## 📖 References

- [1] Dobróka M., Szegedi H., and Vass P., Inversion-Based Fourier Transform as a New
  Tool for Noise Rejection, _Fourier Transforms - High-tech Application and Current Trends_
  (2017), DOI: [http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/66338](http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/66338)
- [2] Bunck B. F., A fast algorithm for evaluation of normalized Hermite functions,
  _BIT Numer Math_ (2009), 49, pp. 281–295, DOI:
  [https://doi.org/10.1007/s10543-009-0216-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10543-009-0216-1)
